title: Some Git tips
s: git
date: 2016-12-03 21:35:31
tags:
    - git
    - tools

categories: geek
---

Git is so popular around the developer world, as well as Github. Nowadays almost every developer could use git a bit. It was hard to imagine this situation in several years ago.

To master your development tool would help you focus on development itself. And provide more information when hacking code.

Git has so many commands, and each commands have many parameters. It is common that people says "Oh! I don't know we can use Git like that!". This article is for sharing some commands I use often. Hope it helps, and I hope you can share your tips as well.

<!-- more -->

## Git config

This is most basic. Make your own `~/.gitconfig`. I did, and put lots of alias into it. Part of my `~/.gitconfig` is

```
[color]
	ui = auto
[user]
	name = YOUR_COMMIT_NAME
	email = YOUR@commit.email
[alias]
	lg = log --graph --pretty=format:'%Cred%h%Creset -%C(yellow)%d%Creset %s %Cgreen(%cr) %C(bold blue)<%an>%Creset' --abbrev-commit --date=relative
	ld = log --decorate --graph
	ln = log --decorate --graph --name-status
	lf = log --pretty=fuller --decorate --graph
	s  = status
	amd = commit -a --amend
	cm = commit --amend
	co = commit
	ca = commit -a
	ck = checkout
	ri = rebase -i
	ri5 = rebase -i HEAD~5
	ri10 = rebase -i HEAD~10
	ra = rebase --abort
	rc = rebase --continue
	cp = cherry-pick
	rb = rebase
	fp = fetch -p --tags
	g = grep
	sm = submodule
[diff]
	algorithm = patience
[core]
	editor = vim
	autocrlf = input
	quotepath = false
	paginate = true
	pager = less
[push]
	default = simple
[url "git@github.com:"]
	insteadOf = https://github.com/
```

## tig

[tig](http://jonas.nitro.dk/tig/manual.html) is a very useful command line interactive tool. Even in Mac you can install it via `brew`

## Range

In Git, you can specify a range by this format `<HASH1>..<HASH2>`, for example

```bash
$ git log -p HEAD~10..HEAD~3 # see commits content between HEAD~10 to HEAD~10
$ git log -p bfd4dd408cf..af9c8c9b6 # similiar, buy specify specific hash
```

## Sharing

Sometimes you will co-work with people who cannot access full repository. We can send some changes to him by patches. Because Git is patch-based tool, manipulating patches is natural for Git.

### format-patch

To format patches, we should specify a range to command.

```bash
# To create a patch file for latest commit
$ git format-patch HEAD^..HEAD
0001-update-view.patch

# To create patch files for recent 5 commits
$ git format-patch HEAD~5..HEAD
0001-bison-add-empty-mycoach-fragment.patch
0002-bison-Render-basic-MyCoachFragment.patch
0003-bison-use-xml-to-define-tab-layout-in-MyCoach-and-fi.patch
0004-working-on-tab-steps.patch
0005-update-view.patch

```

### am

In the other side, people can apply that patch via `am` commant

```bash
$ git am 0001-update-view.patch
Applying: update view
```

The benefit of `format-patch` and `am` is that it remains commit message.

### archive

If you gonna to share a snapshot to people who cannot access full repository. For example, you co-work with another company, and they want source code in a specific version.

```bash
$ git archive -o /tmp/ouptut.zip HEAD   # latest one
$ git archive -o /tmp/ouptut.zip <HASH> # another version
```

of course you can use tag, if you manage tags in proper way.

## Browsing

### log

Everyone uses `git log`. It can provide many information in pretty format.

```
# In reverse order, display changed content from specific commit
$ git log -p <MD5>..HEAD --reverse

# To see merge graph and what file was changed
$ log --decorate --graph --name-status
```

### show

Not only to see the content of one commit, we can also see **full content of one file in specific commit**.

```bash
$ git show <HASH>:./path/to/file
```

Sometime when I want review a Pull-Request. But you know, usually if you cannot see the whole file, you cannot get overview of the change, then it is hard to understand "Is this change safe?".

I will use this command to see **diff in whole file**.

```bash
$ git show <HASH> -U10000
or
$ git show HEAD~5 -U10000
or
$ git show origin/SOMEONE/branch -U10000
```

**10000** is just a large-enough number. of course you can adjust it. Sometime I use **vim** to review patch

```bash
$ git show <HASH> -U10000 | vim -R -
```

### diff

The basic usage of diff is to see different conent between two commits.

```bash
$ git diff HEAD~10..HEAD
```

To see **What changed in a specific file, between two commits?**

```
$ git diff <HASH>..<HASH> Thefile
```

If we want to see **What files were changed, between remote master and my current work tree?**

```bash
$ git diff origin/master..HEAD --name-status
```

## Others

### gc

If you found there are too many small object files under `.git/objects/`, this command could pack them into one large file.

```
$ git gc
```

ps. Git is more like a object filesystem. The way Git works is to manage many [objects](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Internals-Git-Objects).

### clean

If you want to clean up EVERYTHING doesn't be tracked by git, such as generated files.

```
$ git clean -xdf
```

Be careful, I usually use command and mis-cleaned my config files.(orz)

### reflog

**This command will save your ass in some day**.

Sometimes you use `reset` to change your HEAD, or **to delete a branch**. We know the content still exist in the git repository, we cannot get it back because we don't know its hash.

That is why git reflog matters. It records every action you did in your git repository, so you can get everything back.

```
$ git reflog
```

### clean with gc

**This is a bit dangerous**.

If you found your git repository is huge, full of objects you really don't need. The command will prune not-tracked-objects. For example, if you had ever fetch objects from another remote server, but you don't need them anymore. Even if you delete every branches in your repo, those objects still exists in your git repo. (a bit like **dangling object**)

This command will clean them. And it definitely effects **reflog**, so pleae be careful for this command.

```bash
$ git -c gc.reflogExpire=0 -c gc.reflogExpireUnreachable=0 -c gc.rerereresolved=0 \
    -c gc.rerereunresolved=0 -c gc.pruneExpire=now gc
```

## Rebase

Well. I don't wanna talk about `rebase`. `rebase` is too **IMPORTANT** so it should be a standalone topic. In my personal opinion, a people don't udnerstand Git until who know how to use `git rebase -i`.

`rebase` is not only doing rebase, but can also edit previous commits.(remove, edit, squash). To use `rebase` in proper way will make you commits looks perfect.

This is one of most useful git-rebase command. Please read git help to understand how to use git rebase, if you don't know about it.

```
$ git rebase -i <HASH>
```

At least, in here I want introduce a common situation in development process.

```
   foobar
o---o---o---o---o  master
    |            \
    |             o'--o'--o'  topic
     \
      o---o---o---o---o  next

```

1. You start work from commit `foobar`, and you create 5 commits in branch `next`. You are in branch `next` now.
1. Some people works on `master` branch and have progress. `master` branch got some commits.
1. Your colleage create new branch `topic`, and he gave 3 commits into it.

If you wanna get his effort to your branch. It means **I wanna develop base on my colleague's work**. Then we can use rebase like this

```
$ git rebase -i --onto topic --fork-point foobar
```

Then the result looks like

```
   foobar
o---o---o---o---o  master
                 \
                  o'--o'--o'  topic
                           \
                            o---o---o---o---o  next

```

